Uh, no ma uh, welcome to the Maori Select Committee.
Um, we, uh, my name is Dan Bid ua,
and I'm the chair of the Maori FE Select Committee.
We've got representatives across parliament here today
to hear the submissions around the Wai
or why we are to a claim settlement bill.
Um, I'd just like to start out by acknowledging, um,
the fact that I understand we couldn't make it
to your role here because of a tangi.
Uh, and I'd like to acknowledge that, um, passing there.
Uh, it's very good to have you here today with us, uh,
to hear your submission.
So, um,
before we get underway, I might just get members
to do a quick introduction of themselves, um, just
so you're aware of who is here, uh,
Today,
uh, or,
Um, I'm a member of TE
and, uh, it's an honor to have you here today
and, uh, to hear what you have to tell us.
So, uh,
I am the, uh, member for the East Coast, um,
which is a giant electorate up there on the east.
Uh, and a member of this, uh, wonderful company.
It's very nice to have you here. Thank you for coming.
Uh, I know it's a long journey for you,
and it's been a long, long journey.
So we are very keen to hear from you
and to hear your, your stories.
Fleming,
um, I get to spend a lot of my time at, uh,
just on the other side of, uh, of your mountain.
Uh, and so it is, yeah, grateful to be.
I was really, really looking forward to coming
to your place, and I really hope that as this, uh, process,
um, continues, we, there might be the opportunity for that.
So thank you so much for being here today.
Hi, I, Maria, I'm MP in Taka, um,
and deputy chair of the, um, Maori first select committee.
Privileged to be deputy chair.
I'm very sorry for the loss that you experienced, um,
a few weeks ago, and, um, I'm grateful
and we all are that you've made the way here.
I know it's quite a journey as well. Um, so thank you.
Thank you. Um, and looking forward to today.
Um, and as stated
before, I'm the chair of the MA committee
and also the MP for North Co.
Um, we may have other members join us, uh,
throughout the session, and, um, but
otherwise it is our pleasure to welcome our first, um,
person today to submit their hearing.
Uh, that is Patrick O'Sullivan. Um, Patrick,
so just before we get started, Patrick, uh,
you've got five minutes for your individual submission.
Feel free to treat your submission as read.
Um, if you wish to highlight any particular things, um,
or leave time for questions, it's over over you.
Um, we've also got another member
that's just arrived if you wish to introduce yourself to,
uh, the audience.
Um,
Um, so o over to you, Patrick.
Yeah, Kia, just getting to, that's say, settlement
on the banks of the river, not Hamilton.
Um, but before we go any further, I'd just like
to acknowledge the fact that you people have set time aside
to serve the country and all it goes with that irrespective
of political affiliation.
I couldn't do it. I mean it, anyway.
Um, There's a place called Kit on Wy River.
Now, when I was secretary to the w Wyoming Trust way,
way back, uh, incorporated about 19 84, 85, um,
we put a claim in for the W block.
It was Y 37, became Y 48, and then became Y two T one.
The go, or the Justice Department called us into direct
negotiation on that block
and to prove that there was no title for the Wyman O Block,
as per sections 27 to 33 of the Native Land Court Act 1880,
we selected certain villages on the edge of the block
to show that those villages,
whereas in on the 5th of April, 1887,
they'd been declared part of the Wine Marna block.
At least one of them was declared, declared part
of another block, uh,
in 1894 proving there couldn't have been a survey
certificate of title for that block.
Indeed. Um, Kathy Ma
and her block report, uh, 2005 I believe states
there was no certificate of title
of Y million number one block 384,260 acres.
Why not? But
what they did was they incorporated 88,000 acres
of another block called the A block, the raw block,
if you like, put that into the Y million block
and didn't tell anyone,
even the land court was unaware of what was going on.
Although the CFA plan WD 7 76
shows a boundary on that plan bound
to the TIA block.
So that's why it was never, uh, advertised for objection.
The result being that when later plans came up,
right, was prepared to be part of Ang Block
and given the block Appalachian W2 A, the family there,
or if you like, is ti para fine.
Um, when I went through the
out a plain claim settlement bill, I found that TI Para
was covered in this bill.
The full final settlement,
no land was being returned to them yet.
If you go back to say the JI policy units, um, report
of 1894, MS.
Came, she, they show the boundary of the 600 acre reserve
that was proposed to be set aside for that family.
What I'm trying to get at is, I,
I believe these families need the right, um, to be heard.
Um, we'll put it another way.
There should be advertised meetings
of different families covered by this bill
to make sure they agree with the terms of the bill.
Mm-Hmm. That's me.
Cut by. Um, thank you for your submission, Patrick,
are there any questions or apartheid for
that was really clear.
Thank you very much. I wish all submissions
were like that. Thank you very
Much. You want me to get straight
to the next one then?
Um, no. Just to say that we'll follow up there with, uh,
Yeah, I've got an incidentally two, just one final point.
Yes. Uh, 1993, I think it was the 8th of December,
a meeting was held of the descendants of those
with an interest in Kerry.
They showed very strongly that they wanted that land back.
Okay. Yes.
Okay. Thank you Patrick. Right.
Um, so there's no other questions on
Patrick's individual submission.
We've got the submission from Tega
or Manga Papapa.
Yep. Uh, which you are also speaking
to on behalf of the Trusts.
Um, are there anybody else you'd like to invite to the table
or No, just, okay,
Wonderful one, why it shy, so
That's okay.
Um, so you've got 10 minutes on this one. Okay.
Feel free to just highlight, um,
any particular things you wish
to treat your submission as read. It's over to you.
Well, given it's, um,
and Justice Department,
even though we were protestors asked us
to take wayward girls from my mouth
and the charge of Harry and Minnie.
Ana Harry was X way one from the Army.
Um, I was ex Army as well.
So we worked very well together
and I resupplied the Mariah, um,
whilst these girls were there.
Um, and just
before I go any further, we used to do a bit
of poetry up there, and here's one
for you guys very briefly.
Sam Hunt after the quake last night,
A Rumble lo from the guts of the South Taranaki bite,
6.3 turns out I went, checked his name again,
earthquake, God.
Not that a man dare answer back to a God like that,
but stand his ground if he can,
or for hugging her, turning Mother Earth, turn
with her in pain whilst Miles Royal Mock making life
difficult with all of those reminders of birth
and death toting them about like they don't really matter.
Everybody's so mixed up.
A man does not know one from the other.
A quake last night, born again
or dead again, doesn't really matter what go, what is wise
to know is the Gods by their name.
Ru Mo was his pays, I think to let him know,
you know, who he is.
So remember running this Langer thing,
the kids would all be spouting poetry
in Heavens knows what else.
And they were astonishingly intelligent street kids.
They really were. Um,
but anyway, in, in the case of um, uh, MGA Papapa,
we established ourselves there in 19, uh, in 1995
in protest at the fact, well, I'll put another way in,
in the hope of getting arrested so that we could prove
that there was no title to this block
and the crown couldn't throw us off.
Um, I'm not trying to be stupid when I say this,
and I'm not trying to be Irish,
but we believed we had a implied constitutional right
to be arrested if we broke the law there.
People kettled and laughed at that. But you think about it.
Anyway, um, the situation
with Bunga Papapa was that someone looked and checked
and found, Hey, these guys are right.
So anyway, uh, justice Department rang us up,
can we take away with girls Harry, XRSM, et cetera,
et cetera, his wife, brilliant, uh,
perfectly clean in the bush.
Uh, we had to have a resupply system.
So I cut a boat and, uh,
dingy in half months a week went down
and we were 40 K from Es Road.
Um, the point to be made is that the two families there,
there was a bit of a dispute over who was sued back in 1886,
but the two families were na to Ma or na.
Now, when we entered with Deal with Doc,
the management agreement,
and uh, I've got the date here, I think it was 19 20 16,
if I remember rightly, we had to advertise
for the agreement of the Hapu to TGA
or mga, papapa becoming
the management authority for that area.
Doc insisted, what I would like to know is why
there has not been the same insistence that,
uh, before this bill goes
through the various families listed, uh, are not contacted
through advertised, uh, newspaper notices
to see if they agree
or not with their names, families being listed here.
Mm-Hmm. Makes any sense? Mm-Hmm. Okay.
Uh, thank you Patrick. Um, any apartheid from members?
No. Very straightforward.
Um, fantastic rendition of Sam Hunt's poem. Yes. Very happy.
Incredible that you remembered that off by, uh, by heart.
He's good, eh? Yeah. But just getting back
to the whaling side of things, that was part of it.
Yes. Mm-Hmm. And, uh, the kids loved it.
And these are street kids. Yes. Yeah. Copper the good?
No. Well, thank you for your submission, Patrick,
and we will consider your recommendations. Thank
You very much. Yeah. Oh,
one last thing before I go any further.
We did and, um, uh, well just read the notice out.
We did after reading the bill, produce a newspaper notice.
I've got it here if you wanna read it.
And it reads this way so
that you're clear on what we're getting at.
It's entitled to Quarter Y
or Why Nuru Claims Settlement Bill.
Notice a meeting St.
Mary's LIC Church, uh, hall Setting Street
Live at 1:00 PM uh, 10th of May, 2024, NA of
Naga Nati of my MGA na Para,
whether Hapu named above agree that they are represented by
or as per section 13 one B of the
or a claim settlement bill.
And whether Wai or why do we order or it can affect a full
and final settlement on their behalf as per Section 15 two,
the meeting this, those attending this meeting are requested
to familiarize themselves with the bill,
which can be downloaded from the internet submissions
to the Maori Affairs Select Committee closed
26th of May, 2024 as well.
And this is an important point.
Be advised that section 22.7 0.2 of the Wnu Lands
report by Tangi Al recommends that Teki, manga Papapa
and among other sites, be returned
to traditional owners.
Now, my question is, why weren't traditional owners,
excuse me, called in in
that situation to negotiate?
And the reason the judge said that was
because there's no title for why block the CA plan never
having been, um, advertised for Objection.
Thanks so much. Says, uh, there's a very important point
that you bundle all after all of their work,
made it quite clear that these village sites should go back
to the traditional owners, not some iwi group. Make sense?
Mm-Hmm. I'll leave it
with you. Do you want a copy of that?
Yes, that'll be great, Patrick. Okay.
I'll give you a couple. One
Question of Patrick. Um,
who advertised that was that, uh, that was advertised by
Rangi, Bristol Chairman, Tiana or committee brother there?
Um, Patrick O. Sullivan, secretary to
or among a papa committee and secretary for the ano,
or meeting held 18th of December, 1993.
What? You've got the minutes and newspaper notice
and et cetera, if you want to see those.
Yep, sure. Okay.
Thank you. Yeah, I'll just leave you guys look.
Thank you. Alright.
Alright. Thank you very much, Patrick for your time
and, um, appreciate your submission too. Wonderful.
Thank you very much for the honor. Great.
Um, just before we move into the next submission, just,
um, if you'd like to introduce yourself,
we've got another member that's just joined us.
We did the round of names before, but
Oh,
Thank you.
Uh, next we have Rangi Bristol, um, to make us, uh,
to talk to submission from Te Ano
or
come on down there,
Bristol.
Um, I'm
Presently trying to look up
and, um, my has got a very strong English accent,
but if you can't understand me, can send me later on,
then I'll explain to you what it is.
So, um, don't be offended by my English
attitude, um,
because, um, I seem
to think people can understand me well that way.
And, um, I've been behaving like that ever since.
And, um, my father's English, that's
where the name Bristol came from and my mother's Maori.
So, uh, and I was brought up by my mother with my mother, so
that's only like, I sort of know.
Okay. And, uh, I like to appreciate, uh, the work that our,
uh, friend over here has done
for us over the years.
Um, he's very accurate
and very honest, so I'd like to, uh,
appreciate his, um, knowledge with us.
And, um, as far as here, his concern, um,
maybe our, our president here can save if he had,
uh, brought the papers here where we came
and had a meeting with, um, parliament, um, down here
and we had put under our ship.
So, um, we are wondering why now someone else is
challenging it when they put a change in at the time
and we have to put up this sort of carry on.
So we personally think, um, that it is,
and if someone's got any personal problems on
how we operate, we, you are more than welcome to tell us,
ask us, and we could really explain
how we like to operate and be friendly
and honest with everyone.
And so we hope that we can get something out of it.
And what I don't really appreciate is when we get other
people coming and try to take that
and personally to me destroy it
because, um, I can tell you now, uh, we are doing a, a,
a very good job, uh, and um,
but we just still negotiate the department of
and what's happened in the past.
Um, they
replaced their managers and we've had some real good ones
and we get some now that's little bit un trouble
to have understanding because one, one people when we used
to go to meetings, uh, decided not to respect, um, not,
um, hapu
because we the hapu for that place
and didn't want us at the meetings, so they failed.
But I'm still there.
And, and then,
and um, so, you know, I think, I think, um,
the people here, um, will have a little bit of
exercise on saying where the truth is state
and um, and, um, thank you very much for allowing me to come
and at my safe
and, um, like I say, our treasury here, uh,
our person here for he's, um, here
because he's got a little bit more understanding of this,
um, um, English phrase for example, on how
to put these words out.
And, um, a little bit of Maori, I know I have a little bit
of trouble finding, get the right English
groups to need that.
So, um, Patrick's real good
for talking English.
Me too. Me too.
Okay, are there any questions you wanted to ask me?
I, otherwise I can sit down. Uh,
Yeah. Ha. Have a seat.
You can,
you can sit along you, thank you for your submission.
Um, are there any questions from members around Roni's,
uh, submission today?
Not reason, No.
Any, uh, uh, the, oh, the H was 19.
He of Teki, it's listed in the, um, that had covered
by the plane ment Bill.
Incidentally, I was original secretary.
He was original chairman of, so that's why I'm beside.
And the same principles apply there.
Um, there were, Wang said that
was one of the sites that should go back
to the traditional owners and it's covered in the spill.
It's not going back. Um,
and we don't know quite how that occurred.
Um, we don't want to blame anyone,
but, uh, it, it has occurred that way
and we believe the traditional owners at the right.
Um,
Yeah, For me, Ms. Kim, uh, maybe you can explain how,
how big is your hapu of, um, yeah.
Um, uh, no.
Probably the last time we counted whether, um, one or here
and, and, um,
probably about 7,000.
Thank you. We have a family, what we call the trust,
who are the same people of that acknowledged
to the settlement.
And we have meetings pretty regularly.
Um, okay.
Well, if there's no further questions, um, just like
to say thank you Rangi
and Patrick again, uh, for your submissions
and which we will consider, um,
your recommendation on the second page of your submission.
Thank you. Um,
next we have Aaron Rice Edwards, uh, know my, um,
Welcome evening.
Yes. Um, just a reminder if you wish to speak today
or we've, we've, um, there are some members who are fluent
and others who aren't.
We've got translation, so you're free to speak today
or English, um, as you wish.
Aaron, you've, you've got, um,
you've got 15 minutes allocated just
because of, is that right?
15 minutes allocated
cover your various submissions.
Um,
my members of the Nati
Iwi trust apologies.
Um, iwi Trust,
uh, over to you Eric
Was honor.
I'd Like to say though, um, it's a real power.
You will always hear that this is a flaw process.
We all understand that.
We all understand that the trouble is with the process.
Some of ours have a, an ability to use the process
for self gain and for,
and sometimes that's some thing
that's cruel about the process.
Though we acknowledge that it's flawed sometimes some
of our own win buy into that flaw process to get self gain
or gain that shouldn't actually be there.
Mm-Hmm. Outside the am we from
UA Principle of,
Uh, so ordinarily NA would love to be in a position
to give resounding and unfettered support to our relations.
Um, unfortunately with a heavy heart, we're reluctantly.
We are here today, um, again, because of Crown process
and our venom,
I suppose today is directed at the Crown's policy
and the lack of adherence to
that policy, not so much throughout win.
So we're here today to seek, to ensure recognition of
WPA connections and rights at two places in particular.
That's why K Prison
and ICFL, uh, we think that the Crown policy in terms
of overlapping claims process
and the in regards to treaty settlement negotiations,
has not been fully adhered to.
There are unresolved issues in regards
to claims and settlements.
Uh, that's why we're here today.
Um, so it's a simple remedy for us
and it's in our submission, uh, a pause a on the progress
of this bill until such time as and ourselves finalize
and sign an a relationship accord, which talks
to those two special places, which we are the subject
of numerous Hui, uh, over a number of years.
So just a bit of background, uh, and we'll come back and,
and, um, and summarize.
Um, so in the course of UA settlement negotiations, um,
we have a considerable and extensive overlapping area.
Um, without going into too much detail,
it extends from all Al
and this is your domain, uh, Suzy, all the way through
to UA Township and
beyond al here itself extends TE includes all of Thu Mona.
So in terms of Waka, in terms of cultural connections
and rights, uh,
our interest predate Native Land Court Awards, uh,
we were deemed rebel in Hoho, uh, by the Crown.
We're often marginalized by that Native land court process.
That's why you will, you won't always necessarily see Nati
HOA in those Native Land Court awards.
We are not, um, as part of our negotiations, uh,
facilitated often by the Crown with our relations, uh,
that culminated in October, 2021 in a joint communicator,
which I understand is attached to our submission.
Uh, that agreement was essentially to resolve some
of those overlapping issues matters, uh,
on a number of properties.
Again, within our, there's uh,
very limited crown assets available
for treaty set negotiations.
A lot of those assets were in that overlapping area
with the, thus the extensive negotiations in quarter we had,
uh, which culminated in that agreement, that agreement, um,
oh, under that agreement, um, Nati ho agreed to support, um,
a number of properties remaining within the Quarterway
settlement package, including prison and CFL.
We agreed to step back from those two properties subject
to a number of conditions being met.
And they set out clearly in the joint communicate
that the cultural connections
of AWA would be recognized via nons
statutory redress mechanisms.
That was agreed to by and ourselves at the time, uh, ua,
that those cultural connections, uh, the nature extent
of those would be addressed and confirmed by both parties.
Thirdly, that the Crown, uh, would provide statements
of association to Nati Hawa for both of those sites.
That's something, something that we're still negotiating
with the Crown in terms of how that might happen,
we assume it will be in our deed of cinema, uh,
which will have come hopefully this year or early next year.
And the fourth leap, uh, that those cultural connections
to those two places in particular by Kuni Prison
and ICFL would be included in a relationship accord, uh,
to be drafted and formulated by ourselves with to Wai.
So subject to, uh, following the, uh, joint communicate,
and again, importantly to note that
that joint communicate was critical in our view in enabling
and allowing to Wai to move forward
with their settlement negotiations with the Crown in terms
of the resolution of overlapping
claims, uh, particularly with na.
But again, it was, uh, in our view conditional on a number
of those conditions being met.
Uh, in 2023.
January, 2023, NA took the pen
and drafted what we thought would be the first cut of
a relationship accord, uh, as pursuant
to the joint communicator
and contemplated in there, uh, it was our expectation, uh,
and intention that that relationship accord would be
finalized and to, prior to the deed of settlement
of UA being finalized, that wasn't the case.
Uh, we didn't hear back from DE in terms of that draft for
well over six months, if not 12 months.
Um, we called on the Crown again
to facilitate further hui again, just with the aim
of just finalizing those loose threads, uh,
those loose threads in terms of overlapping claims,
particularly in regards to those two properties.
Uh, as recently as of April, may this year,
we've had further hui with, but unfortunately we've been
unable to finalize
and sign off that, uh, we have made a number
of amendments in terms of what those nons,
statutory redress mechanisms may look like.
Um, but again, we still haven't had final agreement.
So essentially that's why we're here today
because the relationship court,
a very simple matter we thought, uh,
hasn't been signed and finalized.
And again, the failing of the crown
and not upholding to hearing its own policies
and allowing this bill to come to this pro um, process.
So again, unfortunately we are here at this late stage.
We feel stink being here, um,
but we feel it's important, um, that we steadfast in terms
of our, um, in terms of agreements reached be uphold.
Um, so that's why we're here today.
Um, welcome any questions from our team?
So our recommendation is that, uh, pause in terms
of the pro, um, progress of this legislation be recommended
to the minister until such time as
that relationship agreement t is finalized
and signed, uh, by both and
Thank you. Uh, AMI,
Aaron, um, are there questions from the committee
around Aaron's submissions?
Um, yeah, Steve Ag
Critiques of the Crown process are absolutely
widely expressed often in these settlement processes.
They seem to cause a lot of problems
and fully acknowledge that that's, um, seems
to be part of the nature of them.
What I wonder is, um, what,
are there any opportunities for yanga within
the iwi to get resolution for this
at this stage of the settlement?
Because it's, I don't know of examples
of the settlements being being paused though.
This request comes unfortunately time and again
and acknowledge that this is a, this is an occurrence, uh,
that we see in settlement processes,
which is an inadequacy of the process.
Um, but it's really a question whether there is opportunity
still for Langa on in terms of where you've got to,
Uh, that was contemplate as part of the, in terms
of affirming Juana post settlement.
Um, we we're planning on
and hoping we'll have one under with our relations
regarding those places
and others in terms of our shared connections.
Um, I suppose for us at this point in time is,
um, safeguarding our interest.
There's no guarantee that those interests we recognize in a
relationship agreement by our relations, um, we've hoped
to have got to that point by now.
It's gonna have 18 months and
that's still sitting there in a draft form.
Uh, so I suppose we're, uh, expecting
and hoping on some leverage from this process
and also the crown, um, to make that uh, happen.
Yeah. Uh,
Okay. So thank you for
coming to, um, Wellington.
We are all looking forward to coming up home,
but, um, not to be, uh, you mentioned,
don't know the exact term,
but you said nons statutory, what, what was that?
Request mechanisms, right?
So something that wouldn't necessarily appear in our
settlement legislation or mentioning our relationship
to those places, right?
Yeah, something I suppose in the form
of an relationship agreement
and things we're contemplating, uh, place, uh, site visits,
annual, uh, potentially, you know, joint in time.
So that, um, wouldn't necessarily have
to be in legislation.
No, it wasn't contemplated be in legislation
that would be in the agreement between ourselves and
Right. Gotcha.
In the subsequent meetings Yeah.
That you've, you've had, um,
how much actually separates do, would you able to quantify
that for the committee?
I mean the committee will ask, um, a lot
'cause it raises a lot of questions about the process
and what's in the agreement.
But from your perspective, it might be helpful for us
to know if you think there's hope of, um,
resolving the issues and certainly when um, we ask
for response from certainly ask the same question.
Look, we we're hopeful, I think in since um, October,
November, 2022, there's been significant pro pro um,
progress in resolving some of the overlapping issues.
'cause they were quite extensive between us in terms
of multiple properties throughout National Park,
Wayne and Edwin.
Um, so we're pretty much resolved all of those.
It's just the, is the remaining piece of the puzzle.
Uh, that relationship agreement,
again, there's a draft there.
We are wordsmithing a couple of paragraphs in terms of
what does our re and cultural connections look like.
It's really from our perspective anyway,
So we've got a copy of the communicate.
You have got copy your question.
Has, has anything changed about the,
because it seems to, it looks quite straightforward to me
and so I'm wondering, um,
and I'll certainly be asking that same question,
but what has actually has anything changed from the time the
communicate was signed and agreed to?
And now,
Um, fair to say, nothing has changed apart from
that one unresolved matter ti has not been signed
and agreed to yet, right?
Otherwise, all those other matters contemplate, employed,
communicate, have in fact, uh, been affected.
Um, alright. There's no more questions.
That doesn't mean we're not in, um, you know,
I think we've just, we'll ask the officials
to make sure we have the facts
and, um, see what can be done.
But we appreciate you coming down, uh, to Wellington, uh,
and for your oral submission today. Thank
You very much. Thank
you.
And finally, today we've got Aiden Gilbert, I mean,
Hold on.
Hi, my Aiden.
So we've got a bit of time, um, 10 to 15 minutes.
Uh, sorry. Oh, okay. Yes.
So, um, there are a couple of people wishing to take photos
and if just, um, have to let the committee know
and if there's any, is there any issues?
I think committee members are normally, yeah,
just make sure, just make sure you get the good sides.
Um, so Aiden, uh, KDA. Yep.
Um, so o over to you, how you wish to spend this time.
Um, and yeah, um, treat your submissions
Read,
Um, speaking to good breakdown.
Um, what's at stake here is, uh, probably the largest flock
that ever passed through the native lands
to give you a brief, some 458,500 acres.
Uh, and then partitioned off to what we call today,
one within or one to 411,500 acres.
And then, um, partitioned off to the,
the under the ana.
And there are a number of ies, uh, that belong to that.
So, um, probably one of the longest claims.
Uh, we are an area that, uh,
the most overlapped in the whole multi, uh, uh,
and probably the one of the longest journeys in terms
of settlements given to previous
governments along our journey.
So, um, challenging to say the least.
And, um, a little bit of history, um, both sides
of the river, uh,
and you would've heard mentioned, um, so tribe
that we are, um, representing, um,
that's, that's cutting through the chase
and, um, we are here today.
Um, I heard some submissions from some of our ang
and, and we talked about the, um,
and um, I think some of those answers were pretty clear, uh,
what we're trying to, uh, mitigate.
Um, yeah. Um, that's where we are.
Okay. Um, are there any questions for Aiden or the, uh,
or nu our team?
No, Um, you might, well, you did my question to NA
basically, um, the same question said, um,
you know, one, what, um, in your opinion,
is there an ability to come to an agreement?
Uh, and in terms of the communicate, um, what's changed?
Well, we did talk about the joint communication, um,
and it's been a long eight years of, uh,
overlapping discussions which come up, uh, stimulated
to the joint communicate.
And the end of the result of that was
to be a written guilty.
Um, I guess one of our things is that every time we met,
there were things added to the joint communicate, uh, which
we paused and questioned about.
And, um, which really restricted us from signing the
ti at this stage.
Um, the nons statutory approach that we both sides took was
to actually acknowledge,
um, some areas of interest.
So in a word that's where we were with the,
the joint communicate
Further questions for
Aiden members?
No, um, straightforward, um,
submission. So, sorry,
There's one, uh, you would've heard, um,
the submission of Bristol.
So the, um, the issue around tea again,
in particular, uh, there's one,
and then the claim
that there's been no publicly advertised
meetings be another one.
The are questions that we'll no doubt ask, um, for response.
Do you wanna respond to those?
Um, it's written in our, our deed that, um,
we will address those issues.
Um, but some of the issues
that were talked about today in the won national park, um,
so right, it defines whether we can actually, um,
in this process of this settle,
but actually acknowledge those.
But we have written it in our, in our de to trust that, uh,
definitely, uh, ask for those lands back that,
uh, you alluded to.
And of course, um, Patrick.
But uh, again, that's another process. So that's
An important piece.
Thank you. Thanks. Yeah, good question.
Which is a different settlement.
Yeah. Um, okay,
well there's no more partai.
Um, just like to say thank you for coming down here
and making a submission.
Just the final word out. Look, we support our settlement
and, uh, we have to push this through on behalf of,
uh, all our people.
So, yeah.
All right. Um,
everybody that, uh,
brings our public submissions to a close.
Um, again, once again, thanks for coming down, means a lot
and I know it's a long drive.
Um, but this is your house just like, uh,
your fadi up, up north.
And, uh, we really appreciate you coming us today.